Course Information
Alles einklappen
Course Catalogue: 227-0147-00 L
Lecturer: Frank K. Gürkaynak, Luca Benini
Coordinator:  Enrico Zelioli, Philippe Sauter
Language: English
Hours: 5G
Credits: 6
Grading: graded semester performance
Course Website: vlsi.ethz.ch
Lecture:  Tue 14:00-16:00 (LFW B 1). See below for the detailed lecture schedule
Exercises: Wed 09:00-12:00 (ETZ D61.1/D61.2). See below for the exercise schedule and task descriptions
Questions and Contact: Use the Moodle Forum for general questions (anonymous). This way others can also benefit from it. For personal matters drop us a mail at vlsi2@iis.ee.ethz.ch
Course description
This second course in our VLSI series is concerned with how to turn digital circuit netlists into safe, testable and manufacturable mask layout, taking into account various parasitic effects. Since 2025, the course relies on predominantly open-source tools and puts more emphasis on hands-on design. All students are expected to complete their own design (in groups of two).

Learning objectives:

Understand how VLSI circuits are designed
Gain practical experience in IC Design using open source tools
Qualify to take part in semester/master theses that involve practical IC Design
Develop your own System-on-Chip based on the examples in exercises
Topics:

Basic manufacturing steps
Standard cells, routing layers
Floorplanning, I/O ring, packaging
Timing in IC design and clock dsirtribution
Parasitic effects in IC Design
Placement and routing
Power analysis
Testing of IC circuits
Assessing the performance of ICs
The most important part of the lecture is that the exercises, which will make use of open-source tools (as much as possible) and work on a System-On-Chip design. The exercises are essential for the lecture as the grading will be done based on a project based on the exercises.

Lecture & Exercise Schedule
Week	Lecture	Exercise
 	Date	Topic	Date	Topic
1	17.02	Introduction and Motivation	18.02	1: Simulation Flow for ASIC Designs
2	24.02	Refresher on System Verilog	25.02	2: Drawing Block Diagrams
3	03.03	Synthesis flow, Croc architecture	04.03	3: Understanding Croc
4	10.03	IC manufacturing	11.03	4: Synthesis
5	17.03	Metal layers and standard cells	18.03	5: Introduction to OpenROAD
6	24.03	Floorplanning, I/Os, packaging	25.03	6: Floorplanning
7	31.03	Final project discussion, Q&A	01.04	No exercise
8	07.04	Easter break	08.04	Easter break
9	14.04	Timing	15.04	7: Placement / timing
10	21.04	Parasitics, extraction	22.04	8: Understanding clock tree / timing
11	28.04	Placement and routing	29.04	9: Routing, finishing
12	05.05	Power analysis	06.05	10: Power analysis / IR drop
13	12.05	Testing	13.05	11: DRC / LVS
14	19.05	Reporting performance, power, area	20.05	12: Design for testability / ATPG
15	26.05	Final lecture	27.05	13: Preparing plots, presenting results
Forums

Announcements Forum
We will post updates about the lectures or exercises in this forum. 


Forum for questions Moodleoverflow
This forum is intended for all kinds of questions regarding organization, lectures, and exercises. Questions are, by default, anonymized.

12 ungelesene Beiträge

Team Forming Forum
The exercises and projects are held in groups of 2. If you are looking for a partner, this is the forum to ask like-minded people.

Exercises

exercise_intro.pdf Datei

Exercise 12 Datei

Solution 12 Datei
Projects
Students will be asked to complete their own System-On-Chip design with an improvement based on the example design used in exercises, and they will be graded on the quality/timeliness of the design.

As the final project is based on the exercises, we strongly suggest that students visit all exercises. The students will work in groups of 2 people, they will take the exercise design, and will be given a larger area to make one addition/improvement in the design. Submissions will be made electronically, grade will depend on timeliness (respecting the submission deadlines), functionality, performance and originality. You can find more information about the final projects on the first deck of lecture slides.

At least 5 selected designs will be actually fabricated.

Submission guidelines
This section contains all the information required to successfully complete and submit your final projects. Submissions that do not comply to the following instructions will be penalized with a 0.25 deduction on the final grade. Please read it carefully, and do not hesitate to ask questions if something is unclear.

The submission deadline is 30 June 2026 10:00am CEST.

Project submissions are collected through Nextcloud. Each group should submit as a single compressed archive, named according to the following naming conventions:

groupUsername.tar.gz

where groupUsername is the name of the VLSI 2 account you used to work on the project (e.g. group 13 -> vlsi2_13fs26).

Example: Group 7 has been working on account vlsi2_07fs26. Their submission should be named vlsi2_07fs26.tar.gz.

The final submission should contain the following files / directories (follows the directory structure in the reference flow):

Your final report as a single PDF file, named with the same convention of the submission archive (e.g. vlsi2_07fs25.pdf).
The .cockpitrc used for your project.
The openroad/out directory, containing the following files:
croc_lvs.v
croc.def
croc.odb
croc.sdc
croc.v
The klayout/out directory, with a croc.gds file containing the final GDSII of your chip. You do NOT need to run sealring insertion and metal filling, you should submit the GDS file converted from the OpenROAD's DEF output with KLayout.
The sw directory. You can include the original tests as provided in the reference flow, add your own tests, and, in case changes that prevent simulation output from the chip (e.g. changes to UART), a collection of tests that implement this communication.
The rtl directory, including the modifications required for your design.
Note that to achieve all the submission points it is required that you submit all the requested files in a directory structure as described above. 

Example of submission directory structure for group 07 (i.e. content of the vlsi2_07fs26.tar.gz archive):

├── vlsi2_07fs26.pdf
├── .cockpitrc
└── klayout/
    └── out/
        └── croc.gds
└── openroad/
    └── out/
        ├── croc_lvs.v
        ├── croc.def
        ├── croc.odb
        ├── croc.sdc
        └── croc.v
├── rtl/
    ├── ...
├── sw/
    ├── ...
Project outline
Each group is required to submit a one-page summary of their project, including a clear block diagram of their design improvements. This document should concisely outline the main concept and structure of the work you plan to do in the project, and will serve as a basis for discussion and feedback. The project outline will give you a bonus of up to 0.5 grades if submitted on time. The deadline for submission is Friday, 22 May at 23:59.

To submit your project outline, write us an email to vlsi2@iis.ee.ethz.ch.

Report
As part of your submission, you are required to provide a final report. The report is a PDF document containing a detailed description of your project (design, implementation, testing, results) as it will be the main reference for us to grade you. It should include a description of your RTL modifications, with proper documentation on the design. For example, if for your project you added a small peripheral to Croc's user domain, you should provide block diagrams to describe the architecture, describe the functionality of each module, and clarify the relationships between submodules. The description should be concise yet clear, with possible references to the RTL code if needed (assuming the code is readable and well documented). Together with the design, you are expected to deliver tests to functionally verify the implementation. Moreover, it is expected that you provide a working setup to evaluate your implementation. For example, if your project is about hardware acceleration of a specific operation, you should provide tests that can exploit it, as well as an evaluation of the achieved speedup. Last but not least, the report must include details of the implementation. Rather than a chronological record of activities, this part should describe the challenges that you faced during the backend implementation, explaining the choices made to overcome them.

The report should be in PDF format and not exceed 16 pages. Other than that, there are no strict requirements on the format (no template is given). There is no minimal number of pages.

Implementation guidelines
Functional requirements: It is expected that the final chip has the following Verilog ports: uart_rx_i, uart_tx_o, testmode_i, status_o, clk_i, ref_clk_i, rst_ni, jtag_trst_ni, jtag_tms_i, jtag_tdi_i, jtag_tdo_o. The setup that will be used to test your chip will assume those ports to exists, hence not having some of them will likely result in not passing our testbench. If the ports exist unmodified we will run tests against it to verify functionality of the Croc domain. Any failing test should be explainable from the report (i.e. removed or changed some peripheral, with explanation of the reasons for such choice).
Further, the chip must have a way to output the names of the students in the group. The default way that will be checked automatically is to read from the 0x2000_0000 address (i.e. the start of Croc's user domain) and expect a zero terminated string. This string will be read via UART. If this is not possible due to modifications, a testbench (along possible compiled software) must be provided as part of your submission, clearly documented in the report, and reproducible. It is required that it captures output from the chip, collects it in the testbench and prints it to the console.

Physical requirements: The final chip dimensions and pad locations must match the provided bond diagram. This allows to reuse the bonding pad and sealring already used in a previous tapeout of Croc (MLEM), giving us the opportunity to tape select multiple chips for tapeout while keeping the effort sustainable. The chip size including the sealring is 2500um (wide) x 2000um (high) . If you have special reasons that could require an exception to this rule, both a supervisor from the course and DZ must be contacted and agree upon a different finished size and pad locations.

Pins: You are allowed to change pin assignment but not the bonding pad positions, except for the provided power pins which must stay exactly in the same place (required for compatibility with tester board). Furthermore, we highly recommend to not change the positions of the following pins unless it is absolutely required to accomplish some specific goal:

JTAG signals (tdi_i, tdo_o, tms_i, trst_i)
Clock, reset, and test signals (clk_i, ref_clk_i, rst_ni, testmode_i)
UART signals (uart_rx_i, uart_tx_o)
Also in this case, if you think you cannot avoid to change the position of one of these pins, or you need more for your design, make sure to talk to an assistant first.

Pinout description

Pinout specification for the final VLSI 2 projects

The bondpad_centroids.csv files contains the exact coordinates of the center of each bonding pad, as they should be configured in OpenROAD. Note that by default, OpenROAD displays the bottom left corner coordinates of design objects, so be careful to also account for the bondpad size (70um x 70um) when comparing them to the ones of your designs.

The croc_bondpad.def is a DEF file exported from OpenROAD with only the pads placed in the correct positions, as specified by the coordinates above. You can use this as a reference to compare your designs.

The bonding_vlsi2_2026.pdf is an illustration of how the student designs sent for tapeout will be bonded inside the package.


bondpad_centroids.csv Datei

croc_bondpad.def Datei

bonding_vlsi2_2026.pdf Datei

croc_pinout.pdf Datei
Grading
A timely submission will be worth 3.00 points.
Every started week of delay will be -0.50. For example, if you submit your design one minute or six days after the deadline, you will either way loose 0.5 grades. Starting from seven days of delay, the penalty will increase to -1.0 grade, and so on.
Submissions not following instructions for formatting will incur a penalty of -0.25.

Following bonusses will apply:

+0.50: 1 page outline with block diagram submitted and approved (to be submitted by May 22)
+0.50: Design passes DRC and LVS (i.e. it is good for manufacturing)
+0.25: Design runs a standard simulation of our choice successfully
+1.00: Technical content of the report (design improvement and evaluation of results)
+0.50: Quality of the report
+0.25: Design is chosen for manufacturing
Tapeouts
As previously announced, at least 5 designs will be selected for manufacturing. For projects willing to be taped-out, it is a requirement that designs are open-sourced. We are currently organizing a way to collect your designs in an open-source archive. More details on how these will be collected will follow by the end of the semester. The selected designs will be announced after all projects have been submitted and graded.

Office hours
We will offer an office hour every Monday from 4pm to 6pm in ETZ H71, starting on Monday, May 4.

FAQs
Reference flow installation
Problem:

You do not know where to find the reference flow.

Answer:

Install the reference flow by typing the following command in a terminal:

/home/vlsi2/reference_flow/install.sh

This will copy the reference flow files in a reference_flow folder in your currently working directory. Once copied, navigate to the newly created directory and install the technology files with cockpit:

cd reference_flow
icdesign ihp13 -update all -nogui

You can then start working on your project by modifying the design and implementation scripts in this directory.

Note: if you started working on the Github version of Croc: switch as soon as possible to the reference flow, as the technology setup and scripts on Github are not aligned with the PDK version used for this year's takeouts. There should be no issues if your designed was based on the Github's Croc, as the RTL is almost identical to the one of the reference flow. Any changes you made to the RTL or flow should be easily portable to the reference flow provided.

M1 pin offgrid violations
Problem:

KLayout reports hundreds of M1 pin offgrid (metal1_pin_Offgrid) violations.

Answer:

There is an issue in the GDS files of pads and SRAM macros provided by IHP. Inside these macros there are M1 pin shapes which are not aligned to the 5nm manufacturing grid. In practice, this is not an issue as these are not physical shapes, and therefore can be safely ignored. In your DRC report, you can ignore any metal1_pin_Offgrid inside the SRAM macros and in the pads.

Note that you can also disable the off-grid checks with the a dedicated option of KLayout (--no_offgrid). You can do this for convenience when iterating on DRC fixing, but remember to have a run at the end with these checks enabled to make sure the violations are only occurring inside the macros.

June 11 update:

For what concerns the pads, we were able to generate a patched version of the GDS which should solve this issue. Although this is not required, if you simply re-run the GDS generation step from now on you should not see this issue anymore inside the pads. For what concerns the memory macros, there is no easy way to patch all of the violations, and we will have to wait for IHP to release new fixed versions for this to disappear. Anyways, as stated before this is not a real issue and can just be ignored.

QuestaSim errors
Problem:

Error while running the run_vsim.sh script for RTL or post-layout simulations with QuestaSim.

Answer:

Check the following things:

You are running QuestaSim (or the run_vsim.sh script) from a bash shell, not within oseda.
You are using a compatible version of QuestaSim (available versions are questa-2019.3, questa-2022.3, questa-2023.4).
You have adapted the compile_rtl.tcl, compile_netlist.tcl, compile_tech.tcl scripts to match your designs. Any SystemVerilog file you developed for your designs should be included in the RTL and netlist compilation scripts, and the compile_tech script should be adapted to include the Verilog behavioral models of any macro cell used to implement your design (these are typically available in the technology/verilog directory).
If you use Bender to generate compilation scripts for QuestaSim (so also if you used run_vsim.sh --flist), make sure to have adapted the Bender.yml manifest to also include your additional source files. Note that you do not need to use Bender for this, and for simple changes writing a script by hand is probably the easiest option.
GDS generation with KLayout
Problem:

You run the def2gds-croc script but nothing is printed on the terminal and no file is generated in the klayout/out directory.

Answer:

Check the following things:

The input DEF file path is correct and the DEF file exported from OpenROAD is valid (e.g. not empty, human readable file).
The top module name of your design matches the one specified in the script (e.g. croc_chip).
You are including the GDSes of all used macros (defined by the in_files variable). This is for sure an issue if you added macros in the design which were not used by the reference design / flow (e.g. different SRAM configurations than 512x32).
If you still have issues, you might be missing the definition of the lef_files variable. Depending on when you installed the reference flow, you might have to add the following option to KLayout when running the def2stream.py script to generate the GDS: " -rd lef_files='' \"
Sealring and metal filling
Problem:

You are not sure if / how to run seal ring insertion and metal filling.

Answer:

You do not have to run seal ring insertion and metal filling for your projects submissions. These will be handled in a post-processing phase by us before sending the selected chips for manufacturing. We expect you to submit the GDS file generated with KLayout with the def2gds-croc script.

If you are curious, feel free to ask questions to a TA during an office hour on more details and examples on these post-processing steps. 

DRC checks
Problem:

You are having issues with unusual DRC errors reported.

Answer:

Check that the right options are enabled. You should be able to run the run_drc-croc script in the reference flow unmodified. If this reports no issues (except for known issues such as the off-gird M1 pin shapes inside the SRAM macros).

In particular, you should disable density and recommended checks (--no_density, --no_recommended), and include antenna checks (--antenna), as shown in the reference script.

Remote Access
Remote access to the computer workstations in ETZ D 61.1/2 is possible, but we strongly recommend attending the exercises in person to get the most out of them. If you cannot make it to the exercises (e.g. due to scheduling conflicts with other courses), you can find information on how to access the computers remotely in this How-To tutorial. Remote access is possible over SSH or VNC. For both options, you need to use an ETH VPN connection.

Text Book
For parts of the lecture, the  Textbook for VLSI I (also available online through Science Direct Link within ETH Domain) will be useful. The second volume of this book for VLSI II will be sold at the printing cost. That is for 20 CHF. We usually  bring some textbooks to the first lecture. You can still buy a book afterwards, just stop by Frank's office (ETZJ 60.1) with a 20 CHF bill and grab yourself a book. Frank is usually in the office, but you can send him an e-mail before you arrive to make sure. If you do not have the opportunity to come to ETH but would like to buy the book, please contact Enrico Zelioli for more information.

Regulations
The Microelectronics Design Center (DZ) makes available a vast array of industrial CAE/CAD tools to D-ITET students and staff. The usage of these tools is subject to regulations. To participate in the exercises, you will get a computer account with access to these tools. When obtaining your account credentials, you confirm with your signature that you have read and understood these regulations. We will organize this in the the very first exercise. If you don't manage to come to the exercises drop us a message on vlsi2@iis.ee.ethz.ch

Additional Links
The EDA wiki where you will find a lot information about the technologies and EDA tools.
The Project page, if you are interested in doing a bachelor/semester/masters thesis with us.
The ASIC Chip Gallery, if you want to have a look of all our chips that we taped-out over the years.
